Add glossary (#3569)
Napari/napari: docs/community/glossary.md

| napari term        | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|--------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | channel            | A channel is a grayscale image. In fluorescence microscopy,  each channel corresponds to a range of wavelengths. An RGB image from digital camera consists of 3 channels - red, green, blue.                                                                                                                                                |

Reviewer: * I think it would be good to link to more detailed definitions/descriptions for these terms. Here that might be the wikipedia page https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Channel_(digital_image)
* "A channel is a grayscale image" is not great phrasing, this is going to cause confusion for people new to image processing. I understand where you got this from, but I think we need a better way to explain it.
* We might also add a small note that sometimes people call these "bands" (I think this is relatively common for geoscience/satellite imagery people, and maybe in astronomy too?)

Reviewer 2: > I think it would be good to link to more detailed definitions/descriptions for these terms.

Agreed, I think we should do that for most (if not all) general terms

> "A channel is a grayscale image" is not great phrasing

Yeah I kind of agree, even though it is technically correct.  Are there any fields where a `channel` **isn't** a wavelength? This is true for geospatial as well. We could say something like:

"A channel is an image acquired by a camera that captures a specific range of wavelengths. In fluorescence microscopy, common channels might be x, y, z (I don't know any), while common channels in a standard camera are red, green and blue"

Reviewer 2: > We might also add a small note that sometimes people call these "bands"

Yes I thought we were considering having an "also known as" disambiguation column?

Author: I'm hesitant to use acquisition method or wavelength strictly as a way to define channel, because its definition is not really tied to specific devices. For example, a typical confocal uses PMT rather than camera for acquisition. Fluorescence lifetime acquisition is another example that we can have "channels" but not based on wavelength.
  
If we replace the first sentence to  "A channel is an image that each pixel only contains its intensity value (i.e. a grayscale image)..." would it sound clearer?

Reviewer: > If we replace the first sentence to "A channel is an image that each pixel only contains its intensity value (i.e. a grayscale image)..." would it sound clearer?

I don't think that is much clearer, sorry

Reviewer 3: > > If we replace the first sentence to "A channel is an image that each pixel only contains its intensity value (i.e. a grayscale image)..." would it sound clearer?
>
> I don't think that is much clearer, sorry

I do think it's better. I don't think we want to make it the explanation too domain specific. We mainly use the word channel in the `channel_axis` kwarg in `add_image` (which i think we might want to drop), "split_channels" and when  we talk about "multichannel" data in the docs. This often is in the context of data where you want to associate a different slice of dataset with a different colormap or different contrast limits/ rendering parameters. I'd say most often in optical imaging it is related to wavelengths, but in other modalities it need not be. For example in MRI you could think of  a T1 weighted vs a T2 weighted image as being in different "channels".

In my mind, I think of a "channel" as a dimension of data that are not spatial or temporal, and so looking at different values of the channel you're still looking at the same space and time (up to the limits of your acquisition system). So I'd say a 6D data set of a volumetric timeseries of a single sample would have two additional "channels" in it that could correspond to wavelengths, laser intensity etc.

What does @jni recommend we write here?

Reviewer: > In my mind, I think of a "channel" as a dimension of data that are not spatial or temporal

I think this is getting at it a bit more clearly. 

> I don't think we want to make it the explanation too domain specific.

I'm happy for the first sentence to be non-domain specific, but after that I think we need to include examples that are domain specific. 

If we don't map this concept back to something the user is familiar with, they're not necessarily going to understand they already know what it is. You can see even in this short thread we are explaining ourselves using concrete examples (microscopy wavelengths, MRI T1 vs T2 images, satellite bands, etc.). I think that shows pretty clearly that when people try and explain a concept better, we don't just improve the definition, we add more examples to support it.

> | color map          | An array of colors used to map pixel data to the actual color values.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |

Reviewer: How about: *"A colormap represents the value of each pixel as a particular color. There are many different types of colormaps available, see [link to matplotlib page]"*

* The matplotlib colormap documentation would be a good place to link to. https://matplotlib.org/stable/tutorials/colors/colormaps.html
* I think we typically use "colormap" as a single word. Could you double check by searching across the napari repo & tutorials repo? We'll need to make sure this is standardized (might need an issue opened to track this).

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, will update colormap definition.
- Do we use matplotlib colormap as the source for napari built-in colormaps? if that's the case we could make it more explicit. 
- Yes it's a mix in napari.org. Will use "colormap" for glossary and track the occasional "color map" separately.

Reviewer: Yes, we do use the matplotlib colormaps, but not all of them.
There are maybe also be some non-matplotlib ones in there too? @alisterburt's first PR was about a better colormap for cryo-EM microscopy volumes (but maybe that was more of a vispy thing? I don't remember the details now)
If you need to know exactly what is included/omitted, you'd have to look here: https://github.com/napari/napari/tree/5f96d5d814aad697c367bdadbb1a57750e2114ad/napari/utils/colormaps

Reviewer 3: Yeah we have some of the vispy colormaps, and some of the custom ones too. A dedicated docs page around our colormaps would be good too. @kevinyamauchi @jni do you remember if we ever did something like that? @andy-sweet was also cleaning up some of that code recently

Reviewer 4: I'd be happy to create an issue and at least start the job of writing on some rough docs on colormaps and colors in napari, if only to better understand exactly what's currently supported. That could help motivate some follow-on work to simplify some of the associated code (e.g. achieving @tlambert03's [dream of using `pydantic.types.Color`](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/3587#discussion_r746595476)).

Reviewer 4: I created #3597 and assigned it to myself for now to track that work. I should be able to make some progress on rough docs soon, but anyone should free to assign themselves to the issue or comment on it.

> | dock widget        | A widget that can be attached to the main napari viewer at a specified position.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer: * And what's a widget? You'll need to explain that here too.
* Maybe it's worth emphasizing that attached is a synonym for docked in this context, by putting the word next to in in brackets? *"...that can be attached (docked) to the ..."*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| dock widget        | A panel of the GUI interface that can be attached to the main napari viewer at specific positions e.g to the right of the canvas or underneath it.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
```

> | hook               | Hook is the place within napari where we “promise” to call functions created by external developers and installed by the user.                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer: * Why are there quotes around the word "promise"? I don't think those need to be there.
* Possibly useful links: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hooking

Reviewer 2: an example would be useful here e.g. we use a "hook" in the Viewer's open method to try plugin file readers before using the builtins

> | hook specification | A function signature that defines the API that a plugin developer must adhere to when writing the function that we promise to call somewhere in the napari codebase.                                                                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer: * Possibly useful links:  https://napari.org/docs/dev/plugins/hook_specifications.html
* "somewhere in the napari codebase" is much too vague!
* Honestly, hook specs are more about **when** an action will be triggered, not **where**. I'd focus on that in this explanation.
* If it's difficult to explain without a concrete example, I'd add a concrete example here.

> | keybinding         | The key or key combination that causes some functions to occur.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer: May need to talk about the hookspec for keybindings here, although that seems not completely decided/discussed just yet https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/1272. Maybe @sofroniewn can add more info.

Reviewer 2: This might also be affected by the new plugin engine

> | labels             | The labels layer is an image where pixel values are integers. Each unique integer represents a unique object, feature or classification.                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer: Definition seems reasonable, should probably link to the docs page for labels layers.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if labels being defined directly as the labels layer is a bit confusing. Maybe:

"A label is a region of an integer image where the pixels are the same unique value. They are implemented in napari in the labels layer where each label represents a unique object, feature or classification"

I think these are also known as ROIs? Not sure if that is a correct equivalence...

Author: Thanks @DragaDoncila I will update labels definition. 
I don't think it's equivalent to ROI though. Yes we can use labels to define ROI, but that can also be achieved by shapes or other means.

Reviewer: > I don't think it's equivalent to ROI though. Yes we can use labels to define ROI, but that can also be achieved by shapes or other means.

Agreed, these aren't quite the same

> | layer              | Layers are the viewable objects that can be added to napari viewer. Currently napari supports the following layers: image, labels, points, shapes, surface, tracks, vectors.                                                                                                                                                                |

Reviewer: Would "viewable data" be clearer than "viewable objects"? Interested to hear what other people think.

Reviewer 2: I think the word data should be in there somewhere, yes. Maybe 

"Layers are the objects through which your data can be added to the napari viewer".

Each of the individual layers should probably link to the layer docs.

Author: "Layers are the viewable objects that can be added to a viewer." is copied from API reference > napari.layers.
I find "viewable object" more precise than "viewable data", because layers can contain some objects that do not represent data - for example, use shape layer to draw a line to get the intensity profile. 

Yes hyperlinks should be added :)

If we do want to change its definition, we may want to make sure it is consistent across the documentation.

> | mousebinding       | The specific mouse click that causes some functions to occur.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer: Mousebinding and keybinding should have similar definitions (and be grouped together in the same subsection)

Reviewer 2: Also you can bind to mouse move and click & drag events as well so maybe this needs expanding a bit.

> | plugin             | A napari plugin is a specialized Python package which extends napari's functionality through additional file i/o support, image analysis, or other utilities. Plugin developers specify this functionality through a combination of Python entry points and a specialized manifest file. Plugins for napari can be found at napari-hub.org. |

Reviewer: I like this!
* Split the first sentence - put a full stop after "functionality" and make the second half a standalone sentence (examples of extended functionality)
* Link to the napari plugins section of the docs

Reviewer 2: Not sure about the mention of the manifest just yet since that's still very much in flight at the moment?

> | shapes             | The shapes layer allows you to display a list of NxD arrays, where each array corresponds to one shape, specified by N points in D coordinates. Currently supported shapes: rectangle, ellipses, polygons, paths, and lines. Can be used as a visualization tool to highlight ROI, or be used for downstream operations.                    |

Reviewer: Need to link to the shapes page in the docs - this one is especially important because you need to know the specification for what format to describe your shape.

Also, I notice that there are several layer types missing from this glossary (image, vectors, tracks, points). For completeness, I think we should include them all.

> | surface            | A surface comprises a set of triangles (typically in three dimensions) that are connected by their common edges or corners to form the mesh.                                                                                                                                                                                                |

Reviewer: Is "vertices and edges" more accurate than "triangles"? 
I'm pretty sure in practice, triangles always get used, but you could certainly have surface meshes made out of rhombuses if you wanted.

Reviewer 2: I think this definition is a bit technical... although maybe that's just because I don't really get it? In particular what makes a surface different to a shape? Maybe, what's it used for too?

Author: My understanding of Surface implementation in napari is mostly from the existing documentation: "The data for a surface layer is defined by a 3-tuple of its vertices, faces, and vertex values. The vertices are an NxD array of N vertices in D coordinates. The faces are an Mx3 integer array of the indices of the triangles making up the faces of the surface." Does that mean currently it's only possible to make triangles?

Some possible use cases: 3D area calculation, curvature measurements, surface mapping visualization, and in some other software Surface is almost equivalent to labels layer where it is used to define the boundary of objects.  
Because of its broad possibility (but currently very few implementations in napari), perhaps we leave it technical for now, until we have stronger use cases arise in the future?

> | widget             | A small, composable graphical user interface . A widget could be a simple one parameter/control (e.g. a slider to adjust contrast limits, a drop-down box to select a mode) or a collection of multiple controls with data output.                                                                                                          |

Reviewer: Definition looks good to me

Reviewer 5: >A small, composable graphical user interface component. A widget could be a simple one parameter/control (e.g. a slider to adjust contrast limits, a drop-down box to select a mode) or a collection of multiple controls with data output.

The word **component** might be missing?
